---
title: "The Terminal State of Mind"
date: 2025-05-28 21:24:28
description: >-
  A reflection on why I still choose a terminal-first setup in 2025, not out of
  nostalgia or elitism, but because it supports my flow.
slug: the-terminal-state-of-mind
tags:
  - Technical Notes
  - Productivity
  - Hacking
  - NixOS
  - Nix
---

I use the terminal. Not because I am a command-line wizard or particularly
efficient with it, but because the GUI has never given me the rhythm and flow I
need.

<!--more-->

## The GUI Does Not Fit My Mind

I have tried. I have used Gnome and KDE when they were just toddlers. I
developed with both GTK and Qt, back when Qt had not yet seen Nokia coming. I
know how powerful desktop environments can be. But they never worked for me the
way I wanted.

I do not run a desktop environment anymore. I use a window manager, a Web
browser and a terminal emulator. That is all. I do not even have a file manager.

## Not a Wizard, Just a Survivor

I envy the real terminal wizards. They juggle panes, navigate the code as if it
were nothing, and configure things I did not even know were configurable. I have
seen people eating escape sequences for breakfast!

Me? I muddle through. For nearly 20 years, I was stuck with Emacs, not because I
mastered it, but because I could never really wrap my head around `vim`
keybindings. Emacs let me use commands and functions if I could not remember the
keybind. That just made sense to me.

Even now, I do not consider myself a power user. There are these _modern_ tools
I always wanted to add to my workflow, like `fzf`, `ripgrep`, `fd`, `bat`. I did
not have the time. But recently, I find myself reaching for `bat` and `fzf` more
and more. They reward even a shallow investment.

## Better Late Than Never

Take `tmux`. For years I used `screen`, mainly because it was what I knew and it
worked on my remote hosts. Since I relied on tabbed terminal emulators on my
workstation, I never felt a strong need for `tmux`.

But eventually, I gave it a shot. And after a few days of poking around and
learning just enough to do my job with it, it clicked. I am not a `tmux` expert.
I probably never will be. But even my simple understanding has made my work more
comfortable.

The same thing happened with `neovim`. I used `vim` only when I had to, usually
over SSH. However, there was so much excitement around `neovim` lately that I
felt like I was missing out. So when Emacs started giving me trouble, I gave it
a try. The muscle memory was not there. The command prompt felt awkward compared
to Emacs. But I stuck with it, and eventually, I became productive.

## The Pattern Is the Same

In both cases, the pattern repeated: a few days of grinding, a little reading,
some trial and error, and then progress! Like learning a language or picking up
a new instrument, there is a point where you stop struggling and start
expressing.

The key is patience. Once you reach that threshold of effectiveness, everything
gets smoother. And the more you practice, the more efficient you become.

## Neurodiversity and the Terminal

Lastly, I want to touch on a topic that I did not expect to write about.

I easily get overwhelmed by visual clutter and decision fatigue. The terminal
helps me quiet all that. My terminal-first setup is not about flexing or showing
off, not even about efficiency in the traditional sense. It is about being less
distracted. There is a calm to it.

Also, the mouse! When I reach my mouse and my eyes start looking for the
pointer, I get anxious: Locate, aim, and shoot! This completely breaks my flow.

This got me wondering: what if the choice of terminal-first setup over more
common GUI setups is not only about tradition or efficiency, but also about how
the mind works?

Disclaimer: I am not diagnosed with any neurodivergent condition. But I am
somewhat exposed to the literature and discussions around neurodiversity, in
particular dyslexia and ADHD. I do not know if what follows holds true from an
expert's perspective, but I will still share my opinions.

Fewer visual distractions, clear constraints and feedback, easier deep-work, and
most importantly, reliance on logical and mental frameworks rather than muscle
memory are all reasons why terminals might work better for people with
neurodivergent conditions.

Don't get me wrong, GUIs might have their own benefits, too. But I can approach
TUI applications like `neovim` or `tmux` with a similar mindset to GUIs:
Discovery is easier, multi-tasking feels more natural and transparent, and they
offer better environmental control than plain terminal commands.

Again, this is just my experience, but I find it interesting to consider that
our choice for interfaces might be due to deeper patterns in how we think and
process information.

Or maybe it is much simpler; it might be just about finding a space where we can
think clearly and work effectively.
